Genexpro4ceq8800 version 0.1
============================

This file is part of genexpro4ceq8800.

    Genexpro4ceq8800 is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
    (at your option) any later version.

    Genexpro4ceq8800 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    along with genexpro4ceq8800.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


CONTENT

I.   SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
II.  INSTALL INSTRUCTIONS
III. BRIEF DESCRIPTION
IV.  GEP_MAKESTD
V.   GEP_CALCAMOUNT
VI.  CONTACT INFORMATION


I.   SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

Linux with perl and gnuplot (only necessairy for the scipts gep_fragplot and
gep_rawplot)


II.  INSTALL INSTRUCTIONS

1. Download the tarball from github:
   ``wget https://github.com/markushaas/genexpro4ceq8800/archive/master.tar.gz''
2. Generate the target directory as root: ``mkdir /opt/genexpro4ceq8800''
3. Extract the tarball to the target directory as root: 
   ``tar xvf master.tar.gz -C /opt/genexpro4ceq8800 --strip-components 1''
4. Your may - also as root - link the executables in the bin folder to a folder
   in your $PATH e.g. ``/usr/bin/''


III. BRIEF DESCRIPTION

Genexpro4ceq8800 includes 6 scripts which may be useful to display data files
from the ABSciex CEQ8800 genetic analysis system and to calculate transcript
amounts from these data. The following scripts are included:

    1. gep_rawplot
        Plots the raw data from CEQ8800 run files. You need the software
        ``gnuplot'' to use this program. To plot a raw file from CEQ8800
        please export the appropriate file from the ``DATABASE'' module from
        the CEQ8800 software. Choose under ``Save as type'' the option ``Text
        (Tab Delimited) (*.txt)''.

        Execute the program like: ``gep_rawplot MYDATA.txt''

    2. gep_fragplot
        Plots the fragment results from CEQ8800 fragment result files You need
        the software ``gnuplot'' to use this program. To plot a fragment file
        from CEQ8800 please export the appropriate file from the 
        ``DATABASE'' module from the CEQ8800 software. Choose under ``Save 
        as type'' the option ``Text (Tab Delimited) (*.txt)''. 

        Execute the program like: ``gep_fragplot MYDATA.txt''

    3. gep_renamefrag
        Renames all *.txt files in a directory to *.ceqfrag. This extension will
        be recognized by the programs gep_makestd and gep_calcamount.

        Execute the program like: ``gep_renamefrag''

    4. gep_renameraw
        Renames all *.txt files in a directory to *.ceqraw. This may be helpful
        to keep track of your files.

    5. gep_makestd
        Calculates the standard values for each fragment which should be 
        analyzed with gene expression profiling. See section IV. for more
        details.

    6. gep_calcamount
        Calculates the amount of each fragment which should be analyzed. See
        section V. for more details.


IV.  GEP_MAKESTD

In order to calculate the amounts of each fragment which you are going to
analyze you must have a ``standard curve''. This program calculates the standard
values for each fragment which you are going to analyze. You need a folder with
all fragment result files which should be used to calculate the standard values.
These files have to be exported from the ``DATABASE'' module with the option
``Text (Tab Delimited) (*.txt)''. Please rename all ``*.txt'' files to
``*.ceqfrag''. You may use the program ``gep_renamefrag'' as described above.
Additionally you need a file called ``amount.csv'' where you noticed how much
RNA you added to each sample and the label of your fragment results file
(without extension).  Please use the example inputdata files in the folder
``/opt/genexpro4ceq8800/exampledata/gep_makestd/inputdata'' as a template. 

As the program is looking for the appearance of each fragment which you want to
analyze, you need a list of your fragments and the apparent run length in
nucleotides. All these fragments are listed in the file ``frags2detect.csv''
which has to be in your ``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800'' directory. Additionally you
need a file with the analysis parameters called ``analysisparameter'' and which
is also in your ``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800'' directory. You can either create the
``.genexpro4ceq8800'' directory in your ``$HOME'' directory and copy the two
files from ``/opt/genexpro4ceq8800/analysis/'' and edit them or execute the
programm once, the ``.genexpro4ceq8800'' directory will be created and the
files ``frags2detect.csv'' and ``analysisparameter'' will be copied to this
directory. Afterwards you can edit the files to your needs and re-run the
program. It is important, that the fragment with the id ``0'' is your reference
fragment e.g. the KAN-R fragment from your ``GenomeLab GeXP Start Kit''. 

During the calculation each file will be parsed for each fragment, respectively.
Each fragment has to appear in the appropriate size range. This range is
calculated from the expected run length noticed in the file
``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800/frags2detect.csv''. The fragment is allowed to deviate
at most the value which is notice as ``range'' in the file
``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800/analysisparameter''. If more than one fragment is
found within this size range, the one with the maximum peak height will be
chosen. The peak area of all fragments of one sample will be normalized to the
peak area of the reference fragment. This procedure results in a list with the
normalized peak areas of each fragment found in each file. Now for each fragment
the log of the normalized peak areas will assigned to the corresponding log of
amount of RNA which was used for that sample and a linear regression will be
calculated. As a result we will get for each fragment (``FRAGID'' in the output
file) the slope and the y-intercept of the linear regression (``SLOPE'', ``YIC''
in the output file, respectively). The slopes of each fragment will be
arithmetically averaged (``AVSLOPE'' in the output file) and the linear
regression will be calculated again based on average of all slopes. As a result
we will get a new y-intercept (called ``YIC_AVSLOPE'' in the output file). All
these data will be printed to a output file called ``standardvalues''. 


V.   GEP_CALCAMOUNT

With the help of the standard values stored in the file ``standardvalues'' from
the program gep_makestd (see section IV. above) we can now calculate the amounts
of fragments of sample data. The procedure is to a certain extent the same as
mentioned above. You will also need the files ``frags2detect.csv'' and
``analysisparameter'' in your ``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800'' directory. You should
also create a directory and store the fragment result files from the CEQ8800 in
it. Again, these files have to be exported from the ``DATABASE'' module with
the option ``Text (Tab Delimited) (*.txt)''. Please rename all ``*.txt'' files
to ``*.ceqfrag''. You may use the program ``gep_renamefrag'' as described above.
Additionally you need the file with the standard values in the same directory.
As an example, you may try the files in the folder
``/opt/genexpro4ceq8800/exampledata/gep_makestd/inputdata''. Now you can execute
the program just by entering the command ``gep_calcamount''. You will be asked
for the amount of RNA which you used in your samples. Now the fragment result
files will be parsed file per file for each fragment, respectively.  Each
fragment has to appear in the appropriate size range. This range is calculated
from the expected run length noticed in the file
``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800/frags2detect.csv''. A fragment is allowed to deviate
at most the value which is notice as ``range'' in the file
``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800/analysisparameter''. If more than one fragment is
found within this size range, the one with the maximum peak height will be
chosen. The peak area of all fragments of one sample will be normalized to the
peak area of the reference fragment. As a last step, the amount of a fragment is
calculated according to the following formula:

AMOUNT = (10**((log10(NPA) - YIC_AVSLOPE)/AVSLOPE))/RNA_AMOUNT

where         NPA = normalized peak area of a certain fragment
          AVSLOPE = the average slope of the standard curves (see section IV.)
      YIC_AVSLOPE = the y-intercept of the regression based on the average slope
                    (see section IV.)
       RNA_AMOUNT = the amount of RNA in ng in your sample

If in the respective size range no fragment could be detected the program
calculates the detection limit. If the height of a fragment is too low it will
not be added to the fragment result file from the CEQ8800 software (see the
manual of the CEQ8800 for ``peak height threshold''). Only if a peak exceeds
this ``peak height threshold'' it will be scored. The program gep_calcamount
gets this value from the file ``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800/analysisparameter''
(``peakheightthreshold''). The value should be the same as the setting in the
``FRAGMENTS'' module of the CEQ8800 software. As the calculation of the
amount is rather based on the peak area than on the peak height we need a
conversion factor. This ist set empirically to ``1'' but can also be edited in
the file ``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800/analysisparameter''
(``heightpeaklowestratio''). Whit the help of these values we can estimate the
peak area of a peak at the detection limit (i.e. peak area = conversion factor *
peak height, peak height = peak height threshold) and calculate the amount of
such a hypothetical fragment.  This value is called ``AMOUNTLIMIT''. For each
input fragment data file the results of the calculation will be printed to an
outputfile ``*.frag''. The following data will be printed for each fragment as a
{tab} separated list:

       FRAGID = The fragment id from the file
                ``$HOME/.genexpro4ceq8800/frags2detect.csv''
       LENGTH = The run length of the fragment
       HEIGHT = The peak height of the fragment
           PA = The peak area of the fragment
          NPA = The normalized peak area (respective to the standard fragment
                e.g. KAN-R-RNA)
       AMOUNT = The calculated amount (see above)
  AMOUNTLIMIT = The detection limit of the amount (see above)


VI.  CONTACT INFORMATION

If you have any problems or suggestions to the program genexpro4ceqq8800 please
contact me. Contact information can be found under
<http://www.ovgu.de/mahaas/contact>


